This is a very complex title.
Well, here all this level is devoted to digital program and we digitize text
Another part is digital images, but the main program is about digitization of text.
Our goal, our target is to digitize 100,000 books or periodicals.
That means about 30 million pages.
which is a huge, tremendous, foolish program, one of the most important in the world.
And since 1991, 1992, this team here had begun to select and digitize all these holdings, all these materials.
I will come back on the criteria which is the main point.
So we have here a team which is a scientific team, Politique Scientifique de Numerisation, and another one is a technical team, they give orders
uh to uh private companies to uh digitize uh in the format we we want or something like that so it is then you contract out yeah it's not done yeah yes it's private all the work done inside is the intellectual and scientific choice of books and all the technical is out
external outsourced so here i'm in charge of a team of about 10 persons who are specialized in
in one discipline, in one domain, literature, philosophy, history, history of science, history of law, political sciences, economics, anthropology, and we have... Sorry, I will...
We have also a lot of colleagues from research, scientists.
We don't directly all select by ourselves.
We are intermediate between colleagues from university, from inside the library, but also scientific competencies outside the library.
But all the work to do is to find books or periodicals which are both important, intellectually important, whenever they belong to a period or a discipline,
but who are also scarce books, or rare books, or difficult to find, or books not republished, or books not known, in fact, or material
we deserve to be wider distributed yes how about condition does condition play a part if the condition is poor we use the phrase brittle books yes this physical situation is important of course but it's ever
chains are a problem because sometimes these materials are so brittle that we could not use it to be reproduced
Well, it's a bit difficult to convince our colleagues, our curator's colleagues, that because this is a brittle book to be conserved, to be restored, we have also to reproduce it.
Sometimes they have the idea that it will be another damage to reproduce it.
Do you understand?
I understand perfectly.
Because the book is recently restored, rebinded, they don't want to be brittle again.
We have a lot of problems to access to the material source.
This is very important.
So if a book is... Merci beaucoup, Hélène.
Merci.
Sorry, I have chosen some texts, mostly in French, but one or two are in English.
But I can work with some French texts.
Okay.
About what we are doing on a larger scope, what is the...
the digital project inside.
If you have some French text, I'd be happy to take them, because I can work with them.
Well, we will come back.
Okay, good.
So, you see, in some places in the United States, if a book is really brittle, they feel that perhaps it can't be used again anyway, and maybe you should make a digital copy.
And then maybe dispose of the book or whatever.
You don't do that.
You don't dispose of a book once it's been copied.
No.
Your question is, are there still on excess?
Are there situations where you will digitize a book and then because you have to sometimes cut the pages, take the book apart, right?
Don't they have to do that sometimes?
Well, we have done it from a part of this collection, with books we have bought on this purpose, from second-hand books, antiquaria, and we are seeking a lot of catalogues of antiquaria,
to buy books to cut it and to digitize them.
And on the other side, we have reproduced first by photography, micrography, and then only digitized this microphone.
So let me understand.
your copy of the book, the one that Bibliotech National, you will not cut up or keep that, but if you can find a duplicate from a book dealer, not too much expensive, you'll buy this copy,
Yes, and we could rebind it again, but of course, well, it's another expense.
Because it is expensive, by the way.
It's rather expensive, yes.
You have to have a balance between the price you pay for this double or... I think something that interests both of us is selecting the 100,000 books out of 10 million books.
You're selecting 100,000.
1%, I guess that is, whatever it is.
You've given us a rough idea, of course, the importance, the scarcity.
But the curators and the librarians must have a tremendous amount of influence.
Yes.
Of which books will make it and which ones won't.
Of course.
Well, until now we were rather, let's say, not alone, but autonomous.
Autonomous.
Yes.
On this project, we have to achieve this goal.
It was rather hard work because it means
almost an average of 400 choices by month by a man.
Yes, 400 choices.
Because afterwards we have to give all this material, paper or microphone, to the company who are waiting, the contractors, who are waiting to digitize inside a public market, public contract.
Well, it was a rather hard reason, but now, to answer your question, of course we have to deal with advice from department collections, correct, of course.
And we are working with them to give priorities to, well, to know if the priority is to digitize travel or literature or about Paris or about Romantism or about dictionaries or, well, we have always this kind of question.
And our purpose is to try
to have a good coherence on this collection from an encyclopedic point of view, mostly on French culture.
Of course, in science, philosophy, we have to go to other cultures, of course, but, for instance, in literature, we are only centered on French literature.
When there is a strong influence from English or Spanish, we have also some
Italian, but we have also this kind of books, but we are very centered on French culture.
Now, these are not rare books, per se, are they?
Well, some are very rare, but they are, let's say, difficult of access.
For instance,
for the collection on free access on the upper level of the library they are very different they are very it's mostly even it's mostly from a patrimonial historical point of view we have well and we have to take into account all problems of conservation
And for instance, our colleagues, our curator colleagues, wants us to choose mostly, for instance, in 19th century brittle paper or acid paper, more than 18th century or 17th century where the paper is good.
Same thing in the US.
Yes, yes.
We know the Cornell project about the history of mathematics in Cornell University.
Cornell?
Cornell, yes.
They have digitized several hundred books because they are in a very bad stage in Britain, but they are from the 19th century.
That's right.
I've been to Cornell for this project.
Cornell will be in this study.
So therefore, you wouldn't expect to see anything by Voltaire or Mollier because there are many copies of these books.
Yes, yes.
We also want to give access to classical texts
It's a very well-scientific published series, because you have a scientific comment or peri-text, because also it's a very scientific publishing and very well-commented.
Well, even if these books are accessible now, first,
This will not be any longer the case.
And secondly, we think it's very important for a researcher, for a reader on his computer to have access also to references or very well done, published texts.
Now, you mentioned Cornell.
Now, when Cornell digitizes a book,
They make a hard copy.
They make a physical copy of the book.
Do you do the same?
Yes.
Well...
This is an experiment.
This is an experiment in Richelieu.
Perhaps Madame Sanson will show you that.
I pushed from three years ago on this project.
Well, now it's working.
And it's from Digital and with Rang Xerox
docu-tech, docu-print techniques.
People digitized them inside from readers demand or from curators ask and they published this one for instance.
It's about two or three francs a page
Well, if you are American and you want to come back to U.S., you have only to order it inside the library and they will send it to you.
We do that with external contractors to know if there is a public demand.
Now, is there any indication here?
Well, it wouldn't, but I'm not sure.
The paperback jacket, but I'm wondering if they say... Well, no, they wouldn't.
No, no.
I'm sure when you bind it in the hard binding, they would probably say something
That's probably the title page?
This here would be the title page?
Yes, I think so.
But you can choose your size, you can choose everything.
So do you think that you will do that with all 100,000, or that was just an experiment?
No, it's just an experiment to know if there is a public demand to publish on demand, and also for internal use, because of course if you want to replace one book to be restored by another one, you can do it.
The main purpose for us is to give access on a network.
How do you say in English?
The selection of books, documentary politics?
Well, this is one of our missions.
The second is to give the best access
that bibliographic access to these digital materials, to these digital repositories, and this is a very acute, very hard, very complex question to deal with.
And the third mission is to prepare a network cooperation with other libraries.
For instance, in France, with other libraries who have specialized collections or old collections on their own, we could also digitize with them.
And so that we will prepare remote access, distributed repositories, or distributed access.
We don't want to digitize on our own alone.
We want also to distribute this charge on all, well not all, but on several libraries.
So this book is scanned.
Yes.
It's converted into zeros in one.
It goes into a database, a computer base.
If I, in the United States, want to read this, to see this book, conceivably, if I can get into the Bibliothic National catalog, I can get this.
First, in all this material, all these 100,000 books already digitized,
will be accessed next year for the opening of the research level, but only inside the library.
Secondly, at the end of this year, in October, we will give access for an experimental part of this collection, it's about two
1,500 books and periodicals about 19th century French century.
Inside this selection we select books and periodicals about literature, history, political culture from the 19th century so that we could give remote access on internet
not only to records, but also to table of contents in text version, in ASCII or text version, and all the text in bitmap in graphic mode, in acrobat format or something like that.
So this is not ASCII, this is a true copy?
Yes, this is a true copy.
And we, well,
Of course, the distinction between text version and image mode or graphic is a kind of dead end.
But now we think there is a lot of solutions to give access to information by OCR
even if this text from OCR wouldn't be given to the reader, you can keep this OCR incorrect text to search and retrieve information by search engine so that you can
give the answer that i don't know the word lapicid if his word is well known in the 327 page but will it be certain it won't be searching from the true copy it'll be searching from from the ocr but he gave you the location
Oh, that's one.
And you know that you have only to download this page or this chapter to read about what process.
You're putting the two together.
You're putting the text only with the true copy, but you're making reference to the original book.
And for us, it's rather very important to keep in the library
approach and not a database.
A library is not only text or content, it is also all the publishing form, of course, overall on all books, but not only the way the book was printed,
was composed is very important, in fact.
And it's not only logical structure, but it's physical structure, and it's very important to keep all this information for the reader.
I applaud that.
Yeah, because if you translate all that in an ASCII text, you will lose a lot of
Well, all this, we say in French, typo dispositionnel.
Nuance.
Yes, yes.
Yes, and the type of paper, the color of the print, the binding.
And all, very often we have maps, we have etchings, we have tableaux, I don't know.
In French, but also in Greek, you have also to keep this information.
Is your background as a librarian?
No, I was a teacher of
Oh, really?
Formally, yes.
Well, that's very interesting.
But I was always interested in new technologies, cultural new technologies, so that was the reason why I went to this project.
Well, as a teacher of philosophy, and also as one who is involved in new technology, do you have some thoughts on the future of libraries?
Yeah, it's a very exciting question, very exciting question, because...
In USA you had very well, very good books, I don't know if you know it from the California Press, called The Future of the Books, from Gilles Meinberg, and I'm very close what not only him but other person says about the future of books.
It's a very complex future, and
My thought is it's not only a technical change, but it's also a change of thought because it's a change of support, a change of the way you are writing or presenting or composing something you want to communicate.
The future of the library is also linked with this new way of writing, of communicating.
It doesn't mean that books will disappear, not at all.
But we will have another kind of level of
of organizing our thinking, a way of communicating or learning something.
Does it concern you and whether or not books of the future, I mean, clearly the books that we have will be preserved.
Yeah.
We're not going to lose them.
It would be too expensive to digitize 10 million books and nobody could understand why you'd want to do that anyway.
But books of the future, do you think there will come a time where they will be written and
and transmitted entirely on computers and not ever see print?
We don't know, but we already see that in research or science literature, a lot of things have changed.
Periodicals come after you have already on the net the article given on the net.
You have a lot of
reading practice are changing because people are searching information more than reading a book from the beginning to the end.
We think that there is a culture of hypertext.
A cultural hypertext.
Yes, it's very important to take into account the hypertext culture.
My concern also as a philosopher is that I protect culture from Ted Nelson or things like that, Engelbart or Bush, all these American heroes, is converging with a lot of
also French philosophers or writers, Barthes, Jeunette, Foucault, Derrida, have done about the problem of organizing writing, the way thinking is not linear,
course but yes and you have a lot of echoes between this way of new literature let's say and the technical possibilities in hypertext and there is a lot of links well it's not it's no
There is no determinism, of course, between one or them, but in parallel, we have, well, simply speaking, of course, you have a lot of echoes or relation between all these cultural on one hand and technical on the other hand possibilities.
Do you think that people are
too afraid of the future in some cases?
Yes, I think mostly in France.
People are very afraid.
Always the question they ask you is the opposition between the screen and the book, the fear that it will
damage the book culture?
I don't think so, I don't think so at all.
It's not the same use, it's not the same, for instance, for learning children.
It will be, you will have better access to information with a computer on the net than with
only class books on the program and of course they have to use books but also have access to database and links with teachers and there is no opposition Does it concern you though and some of the people we've talked to here today
are concerned that perhaps the technology isn't really there to guarantee that this material, once it's put in zeros and ones and put in, that it will last.
How long will it last?
Is this a concern?
This is a question.
And how do you maintain an archival document?
Yes, this is a question.
It's a question of
of the soft in which you have encoded the text, but mostly of the system, operating system, the evolution of the operating system and the machines.
And we know there is a problem of recopying all these digital materials, let's say, every 10 years or something like that.
There's a big concern on that.
But everything isn't eternal.
Of course.
Photographies and also electromagnetic supports, even the optical supports are not everlasting supports.
But even if you know that you have to
migrated is the word they use, to another system every 10 years, somebody has to make sure that everything is copied into the new system.
What if somebody forgets to do this book?
Is a loss there?
I think there is a new question of relation with memory.
Because with digital materials, it's like
It looks like everything could be remembered when you want, which is not the same on books, because you have well-known books, very unknown or very rare books or very precious ones.
In digital collection, nothing is precious.
It's at the same level.
It's only for intellectual reasons that you can underline that or outline that this is very important.
on this well but not for normal material or aesthetical or rare reason we have to recreate all this cultural context about digital culture so as we could give perspective and a memory approach on that if everything is written on these machines
Does that mean the end of things, rare and precious, do you think?
Well, it could be the danger.
I don't think so.
But you have to recreate the cultural environment, the links between, for instance, scholarship, publishing.
Very, very simply.
In France, if a book is printed by Gallimard, well, even if you don't open the book, you know this is surely a good book.
Well, it's perhaps an error, but Gallimard is a good publisher.
It's sufficient.
The color, yeah, the color of the cover and the use are only NRF.
Well, it's...
It's a signal that there is a lot of value, perhaps no value, but generally speaking.
On my opinion, you have not yet this kind of context or cultural environment.
And we have to take some recul, some, well, it's true news, in fact.
Something that concerns both my wife and myself is that when you write something and when it's printed, there's a true copy, there's an original copy.
When something is written on a computer, and available only on a computer,
It can be changed, Kenneth.
There's no primary source.
You really can't see how texts change over the years if you're constantly modifying it, correcting it.
And there's also the danger that somebody else can go in.
That's the reason why I think the...
Let's say the old problem, everlasting problem of integrity, authority, publishing, Marx, are on a new level still alive question.
Well, you can have a text from Nietzsche on the internet.
Is it really from Nietzsche?
and you have to know who had put this text on what side and with which agreement or referee or committee and you have all that environment to
to give value of this authenticity of this text.
It's a new problem, an old problem, a new way to... It's a greater problem, because if you call up a text and it purports itself to be... But on paper... If somebody has very subtly gone in and altered a date, altered a name, you know, these are the things we've talked about.
On paper also you have this kind of piracy or whatever.
Well, at a less extent, of course, because it's easier to find.
But, for instance, in the 19th century you had
publishing done in Belgium, who looks like French publishing, but who are not the same, and the text is not the same, and we don't really know who would do it.
Did you have any questions?
Yeah, that was outstanding.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
No, well, our work is so first select all these materials,
And we are very happy to end this first level of 100,000 books.
We have a lot of new questions, of course, being, for instance, the links between text and images, which is very important.
All the materials, for instance,
music cover.
That's right.
Now, for some of these 100,000, are some of these illustrated books?
Sorry?
Are some of these books illustrated books?
Yes.
With wet engravings or cover plate engravings?
And so then you have to have a higher... For instance, we had digitized from the Smithsonian Institute publication from the 19th century about America, Indians, and you have a lot of
images of all kinds, photographies, etchings, drawings in black and white colors.
Each illustration is very important to the text.
So we want to have not only in black and white bitmap digitization, but also have a new
digitization of all this illustration in the best way, in more defined colors, for instance.
DPI is the best, 600 DPI.
And with a link between text and images.
And you have almost to rebuild, to republish, to restructure all that, which is a very, very easy work.
I think you indicated the price of about three francs per page.
Is that about what it's costing you right now?
Well, the amount of budget, officially, only to digitize and to buy books or microphones, it's 100.
It's rather easy to retain, to remember.
It's 100.
uh million francs one million francs we have not spent all this amount of money about 80 million francs for 100 000 books and i think you have about 80 000 done now is that right sorry you have about 80 000 done now have you done it 90 000 yeah yes
She does it rather quickly then.
Yes.
We have already 90,000 books.
It's about 28 million of pages on digital audio tapes, recording support, and all that is already transferred on optical discs.
I see.
Did you have a question?
Does this project have a name, this 100,000 books?
Is there a name for this book?
No, it's a digitizing project of Bibliothèque Nationale de France.
It's not like the year 2000 project?
No, but it would be a good idea because all of this will be really in excess.
In 2000, it would be a very good goal to give remote access all over the world to this material, because it could be very important to other countries, for instance, for the South countries, to have only with the computer on the line, the phone line, to have access via Internet.
So this is short term, 100,000 books.
When those 100,000 are done, another 100,000?
Formerly, it was 300,000 targets, because we thought it was the size of an encyclopedic collection, about 300,000, let's say.
When you select
both on the first level.
But for economic reasons, for budget reasons, of course, we had only the right to attain, to go to 100%.
And we wanted to achieve this.
this goal.
And you probably said it, but just to make sure I have it on the tape, how many years has this program taken?
Between 1991 and mostly 1992 to until now.
Five years.
And it will be done this year?
Yes.
We ended at the end of the year and we will have this experimental access of this 19th
century collection and we expect a lot of from this experiment because we want people to give us critics or suggestions we already have a discussion group on internet about the presentation
On this server we have five pages describing the 19th century collection from a historical and thematical point of view.
And a lot of researchers, or not a lot, but some researchers and scholars gave us advice or critics on what we are...
So if I call up BNF on the internet, I can... Well, it will be on the BNF server next week or in a couple of weeks.
But right now, you don't have to know that.
It's a bit of a scandal.
It's on Liverpool, on UCAR, because it is an academic...
a server of French culture called Disneuf.
The site is called Disneuf.
I'll give you the address.
They want us to give them some indication so we only give them five pages of what we are doing.
But that's good, it's there.
Well, inside it was not very well appreciated.
Inside here.
Yeah.
Do you have any thoughts, and I know you're a busy man, I don't want to take up too much of your time.
No, it's all right.
A library is built, some libraries last for hundreds of years.
Yeah, I hope so.
But architects of today, I was talking to a gentleman in the United States, and he said, you know, you have to decide what is the life of a library.
Some people think just 50 years, which is, you know,
What do you think the life of this library is in terms of
Well, almost off record, but on record, almost off record.
I could tell you, perhaps because when I was young I wanted to be an architect.
But, no, it's a kind of joke.
I think this is a very important question because, of course, if you only want to store,
to classical, traditional supports, paper, images, even videotapes.
Of course you have to do repositories, stories, reading rooms and all that.
Well, the 19th architecture is the climax of the architecture of the library.
But if you think about what is access to information, text, images from the digital point of view, you have perhaps other opportunity to organize.
the space, the time, the functionalities, the way people have to meet them or to meet librarians or to meet original support or only.
I don't know.
And if you have this idea in mind, perhaps you will do something completely different from this building.
I don't know, but because you can store things very far from where you are to access, a kind of network architecture or logical architecture, rather different.
Well, a national library will be always a national library.
It will be a monument, of course.
So therefore, this library makes a statement physically.
Not only by its function it makes a statement.
Is that a fair statement?
Yes.
And the statement is, in your view, what is the statement?
We use the word patrimony.
I've heard that word a lot.
The word patrimony.
Yeah.
And we're talking about what we see when we look at the Bibliotheque Nationale.
as a symbol of the French nation and culture.
Is that a fair...?
When the people of France and from around the world look at these four towers and this building, what do you expect them to think and to feel?
The architect, Mr. Perrault, wanted both the monumental side for the patrimony signification, but also the transparency.
the un-monumental, so that he wants to show that it was the library of not only for Paris, for Persians, but for all the country or for
Well, digital access was already inside the, what do you say in English, the command, the presidential command from the former president Mitterrand.
The most important thing was to give access with a new technology of information communication.
So in 1980 and 1980,
1988, yes.
But he combined these two ideas, transparency and monumental, but of course it's more monumental than other things, I think so.
You said in your almost off-the-record statement about how you would like to have been an architect, you thought about being an architect at some point,
when you think of the monumental nature of the structure, you probably shouldn't have had glass.
If you're thinking just of a functional library, you probably wouldn't have built it with all these glass windows.
But to achieve that transparency that you're talking about, I guess the glass was necessary.
It became, as you know, a problem.
Indeed, yeah.
We are very...
It's one of our work and we are very interested in all the digital library project in USA, the national digital project initiatives and we thought that a lot of things were done here.
For instance, we have also
think over the problem of workstation interface.
It was a very high-tech solution in 1992.
Well, now it's completely banalized, completely common.
because of Internet access, because of Java solution, because a lot of things.
But for us, it's a very important thing to know what people can do in reading activities on their own machine.
It's not only to view text.
but it's also to compute this text, to compute information, to annotate, to write, to put in database.
If you digitize books, it's not only to give a larger access, but it's also to give a deeper way of working, a more productive way of working.
And we had done an experimental test bed in 1992.
I'll tell you that because you will find information about that in this text, about what we call the computer-assisted reading environment, PLAO, post-lecture assistée par ordinateur, in English, computer-assisted reading environment, PLAO.
and care in english and well it was very how do you say avant-garde avant-garde in 1992 i remember american librarian researcher from california went in 1992 and 1993 and was very
interesting, exciting on this side, because the end user could be assisted in all his research or reading activity.
For instance, when you are reading a book, of course, you underline something, you put notes, annotations, and all this scholar reading, active, dynamic reading, could be assisted on your registration.
you have a great deal of open question of what you can do on record repositories, on what you call, what we can call your own personal library, what you do when you gather a lot of materials from everywhere and you keep it in your own personal library, and what you are doing on your desk.
when you are writing or reading.
And all this free level has to be, for us, a virtual library is the new significance, new signification of this free level.
You discussed that in one of these?
Yeah.
Because it's very interesting.
This impacts on reading.
You know, when you talk about one thing you will lose when a scholar reads a book and does his
or her own annotations, the marginalia, that's going to disappear.
But what you're telling me now is that you can customize the reading on the computer to fit the individual scholar and to preserve that reader's observation.
People agree.
For instance, you have Lévi-Strauss or something, who will work.
on the library, we could perhaps ask him to keep, to preserve the manuscript, the annotation, the marginalia he has done.
Perhaps he won, perhaps he doesn't want.
Well, congratulations to the French for thinking of this.
This is really very important.
Yes.
Because something that concerns so many people is that we are losing documentation of the reading experience.
if it's done strictly here, what is the reaction of the person?
And so often, it happens here on the margins of books.
We try to be very close to the traditional model.
For instance, for us, reading is a very complex activity, of course.
And it's not only search and retrieve information.
We think libraries,
The first goal is a reading place, to help people, of course, to gather good information, but afterwards what they are doing is reading.
And you have to give tools on the environment so that the reading activity is not only preserved, but with the best
best productivity, better productivity.
Who do you suppose proposed this?
The scholars?
The philosophers?
Who proposed helping?
Well, it was from, it's a good question, it was from writers, philosophers, historians, it was about 10 or 12 persons, and we asked them
what kind of tools they would need if they had the good computer.
It was in 1989 and we lend them, we give them a Macintosh with the best stage of the art in software.
and, well, they give advice or critics in their own works, for instance you have Roubault, a French writer Roubault, from Oedipo, from a novelist, and he is
working on his own already on computers, but he wanted things very different to give hypertext access, for instance.
And afterwards, we gathered all this advice
and we give them for a call of tender, so that computer private company competes.
And one of them gave back an application on
under UNIX and system, and where you can visualize both text and images, annotate, links, underline, structure, and, well, it was done in 1992, and this is this... So there was a model for this stuff?
Yeah.
And is it in place, or is it still experimental?
Well...
We hope it will finally realize for next year in a more simple way because it was done in our solution.
from a computer approach, and the computer engineers here doesn't want to have an in-house solution, but only common solution from Microsoft.
And we will use common tools, but by chance, from 1992 until now, all the progress done
had confirmed this approach.
Now you have a lot of tools to annotate, to links, to have in the same format text, images, for instance Acrobat from Adobe, to put OCR solution backwards, to have both.
Well, all these tools are not completely integrated, but they will be.
And the only things we do is to integrate commercial solutions in computers.
What was the name of the French writer again who gave the proposal?
It began with H, I think.
I will give you that.
One is the French novelist Jacques Roubault, R-O-U-B-A-U-D, Roubault.
Jacques.
Another is the philosopher Bernard Stiegler.